.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH INEWS 1 "Mar 17, 1989"
.ds ]W News 3.0 (beta level 7)
.SH NAME
inews \- submit news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI inews " [" \-h "]"
.BI \-t " title " \-n " newsgroups"
[
.BI \-e " expiration date"
] [
.BI \-f " sender name"
] [
.BI \-d " distribution"
] [
.BI \-F " references"
] [
.BI \-o " organization"
] [
.BI \-M
] [
.BI \-a " approvedby"
] [
.BI \-r " replyto"
] [
.BI \-x " dontsendto"
] [
.BI \-D
]
.PP
.BI "inews \-p " filename
.PP
.BI "inews \-C " newsgroup
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Inews
submits news articles to the USENET news network.
It is a front end to
.IR rnews (1).
If you want to submit articles interactively, use
.IR postnews (1);
inews is mainly intended for posting mail to moderated groups.
.PP
The first form (no
.BI \-p
or
.BI \-C
options) is for submitting ordinary articles.
The body of the article will be read from the standard input.  A
.I title
(
.Ch Subject:
field)
must be specified (there is no default).
.PP
If
.IR expire (8)
is currently running or if 
.B SPOOLNEWS
was specified at compilation time, the articles may be spooled to
.I /usr/spool/news/.rnews
for later processing. Running 
.I "rnews \-U"
will unspool this articles.
.I "Rnews \-U"
is run automatically by expire when it is finished.
.PP
Each article is posted to one or more newsgroups. If the
.B \-n
flag is omitted, the list
will default to something like
.BR misc.misc .
To submit an article to multiple newsgroups, the
.I newsgroups
must be separated by commas and/or spaces.
.PP
The
.B \-e
flag is used to override the default expiration date. This is seldom
used.
.PP
The
.B \-f
flag specifies the article's sender.  Without this flag, the sender
defaults to the user's name.
If
.B \-f
is specified, the real sender's name will be included as a ``Sender:'' line
to prevent forged articles.
.PP
The
.B \-d
flag allows you to specify the maximum geographic distribution of your
article; for example, a distribution of
.Ch aus
limits distribution to Australia, and a distribution of
.Ch nj
limits distribution to New Jersey. There is no way to send a message from
California for distribution only in New Jersey\(emyour machine must be in the
distribution that you ask for.
.PP
The
.B \-r
flag allows you to specify the ``Reply-To:'' line in the article header.
.PP
The
.B \-x
flag says not to forward this article to the specified site despite
what the
.I /usr/lib/news/sys
file says.
.PP
The
.B \-F
flag is used to attach a list of related articles that this
message references; it creates the
.Ch In-reply-to:
field of the posted article.
.PP
The
.B \-o
is used to override the default organization name.
.PP
The
.B \-M
and
.B \-a
flags are to be used only by the moderator of a moderated newsgroup. For
details on the use of the -M flag, see below.
.PP
The
.B \-a
flag is used to add an
.Ch Approved:
line to the header.
.PP
The
.B \-h
flag specifies that headers are present at the beginning of the
article, and these headers should be included with the article
header instead of as text. Everything before the first blank line in the
article is taken as a header field, and everything after that blank line is
taken to be part of the body of the message.
(This mechanism can be used to edit headers and supply additional
nondefault headers, but not to specify certain information,
such as the sender and article ID, that
.I inews
itself generates.)
.I Inews
will ignore nonstandard and misspelled header fields entered with the \-h
option.
.PP
If inews was compiled with -DTDEBUG, the -D option causes the generated
article to be emitted to stdout while suppressing actual modification of the
news database. This is intended to be used for debugging an
port-verification purposes.
.LP
When posting an article
.I inews
checks the environment for certain information about the sender. If
an environment variable
.B NAME
is defined,
.I inews
uses its value as the full name of the poster. If
.B NAME
is not defined,
\kx\f2$HOME\fP\h'|\nxu+2u'\f2$HOME/.name\fP
is checked and if it exists, its contents are used as the full name.
Otherwise, the system value (often in
.IR /etc/passwd )
is used.
This is useful if the system value cannot be set, or when
more than one person uses the same login.
If the environment variable
.B ORGANIZATION
is defined, then
.I inews
uses its value instead of the system
default organization name. If its value begins with a
.Ch / ,
then it is taken to be a file name, and
.I inews
takes the name of the organization from the contents of the file.
This is useful when a person uses a guest login and is
not primarily associated with the organization that owns the machine.
.LP
The second form (
.BI "inews \-p"
) is an alias for rnews; it is used for receiving articles from other machines.
If
.I filename
is given, the article will be read from the file of that name; otherwise
the article will be read from the standard input.  An expiration date
need not be present and a reception date, if present, will be ignored.
The third form (
.IB "inews \-C"
) is for creating new newsgroups. The use of this feature is
limited to certain users such as the super-user or news administrator.
.SH POSTING MAIL
One of inews's roles is to perform mail-to-news gatewaying for newsgroup
moderators and Internet-to-USENET gateways. Most UNIX mail submissions may
simply be fed to inews -h to be posted.
.PP
The article-parsing code tries to cope with the Received, >From, and From 
headers generated by many UNIX mailers. The former two kinds it discards; the
latter two kinds it will accept in lieu of an RFC-822 Path: header if none
is supplied. If several UNIX-style Froms occur in the header, only the address
associated with the last one will be kept.
.PP
The
.B \-M
flag suppresses resetting of the post date, and causes the mail path from the
submitter's site to be prepended to the Path header. This means that replies
to the article by sites that use UUCP-only mailrouting based on the Path header
have some chance of succeeding. On the other hand, it means that sites that are
on that `faked' path prefix may never see the posting.
.PP
3.0 and later versions
try to be intelligent about that; they ignore everything in the Path header to
the left of the first match for the sitename in the Approved line (if there is
no such match, the whole path is assumed fair game for optimization). These
rules mean that if one of the sites on the path prefix has only pre-3.0
neighbors, it will reject the article. It also means that you shouldn't use
this option at all if stripping the domain suffixes off the @-form of your site
name yields something other than your uucp-path name.
.LP
If -M is selected, and both mailer headers and a Path:
are found, the code will concatenate these (and then do loop removal) to try
to generate a most-efficient reply path back to the mail sender.
.LP
If no Internet-style From: ID can be found in the From, From: or Path: headers,
the code will try to generate one from the last two components of the
(catenated) Path information.
.LP
The "Status:" headers generated by some mailers are now ignored.
.LP
If
.I newsgroup
is omitted, the \*(LqTo:\*(Rq line of the letter will be used, after replacing
each hyphen in the line with a dot (thus, for example, mail to
.B comp-unix-microport
gets translated to a post to
.B comp.unix.microport
automatically). The title is determined from the \*(LqSubject\*(Rq line.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 25
/usr/spool/news/.sys.nnn
temporary articles
.TP 25
/usr/spool/news/.rnews
spooled articles not yet processed by rnews \-U
.TP 25
.RI /usr/spool/news/ newsgroups / article_no.
Articles
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/active
List of known newsgroups and highest local article numbers in each.
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/seq
Sequence number of last article
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/history
List of all articles currently stored on this machine.
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/sys
System subscription list
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/distributions
Suggested distribution code names
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Mail(1),
binmail(1),
mailx(1),
checknews(1),
msgs(1),
postnews(1),
readnews(1),
vnews(1),
getdate(3),
news(5),
newsrc(5),
expire(8),
recnews(8),
sendnews(8),
uurec(8)
.SH AUTHORS
TMN-netnews version by Eric S. Raymond, based on earlier code by Matt
Glickman, Mark Horton, Stephen Daniel, Tom Truscott and Rick Adams.
