.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH LOCKNEWS 8 "Mar 17, 1989"
.ds ]W News 3.0 (beta level 7)
.SH NAME
locknews \- edits private newsgroup permissions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B locknews [lock-command]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIlocknews\fR(8) command enables gatekeepers of private newsgroups to
add and delete users from their groups without going through the news
administrator. Gatekeepers may also change the post and read permissions
of their groups via \fIlocknews\fR(8).
.PP
Called with no arguments, \fIlocknews\fR(8) enters an interactive mode
that repeatedly prompts for commands with % (help is available via `?'). If
arguments are given, \fIlocknews\fR(8) attempts to interpret them as
a single permissions command and then exits (this mode could be used with
\fIcrontab\fR(1), for example, to disable reading of talk groups during
prime time).
.PP
The available commands are as follows:
.PP
.nf
a  group user...    -- add user(s) to group
d  group user...    -- delete user(s) from group
p  group postsub    -- set post access
p+ group postsub    -- add to post access
r  group readsub    -- set read access
r+ group readsub    -- add to read access
l  group            -- show status of group
x  group            -- exit
?                   -- list commands
.fi
.PP
Any of these attempted by someone without gatekeeper privileges for the
group in question will be rejected (note that \fIlocknews\fR(8) cannot
be used to make new groups or anoint gatekeepers; these things must be
done from the news owner account). 
.PP
The `a', `d', `p' and `r' commands will create a new `permit' line if none
already exists for the referenced group.
.PP
Various other self-explanatory messages may be written to standard output.
.SH NOTE
The private-newsgroups features are effective only when news has been
compiled with the FASCIST and COMMUNIST configuration switches. Before
configuring for COMMUNIST mode, think twice. Then think again. USENET is built
on a tradition of open information sharing, and the vast majority of sites
need not and should not run COMMUNIST.
.SH BUGS
There's no locking to protect multiple concurrent instances of locknews
from stepping on each other, yet. This will be fixed.
.PP
The p and r commands only see and modify the first `permit' line found for a
group. Thus, to avoid confusing \fIlocknews\fR(8), it is recommended that
post/read authorizations for groups be expressed by a single `permit'line.
.SH SEE ALSO
news(5)
