.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH MAILNEWS 8 "Mar 17, 1989"
.ds ]W News 3.0 (beta level 7)
.SH NAME
mailnews \- use a system mailer as a news interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR mailnews " [ " \-a
.IR date " ] [ "
.B \-n
.IR newsgroups " ] [ "
.B \-t
.IR titles " ] [ "
.BR \-drxfS " ] [ "
.BR \-c " [ "
.IR mailer " ] ] ["
.BR \-D " [ "
.IR level " ] "
]
.PP
.B "mailnews \-s"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program presses a mail reader into service as a news interface.
The -antrxfsS, -q, and -D options are processed just as their readnews
equivalents.
The -c option takes the name of a mailer command to use; otherwise
the program uses a system-dependent default, usually either /bin/mailx or
(if TMAIL was suitably defined in defs.dist) /usr/ucb/mail with the -T option.
See the mailer documentation for available commands.
.PP
If you are using a mailer other than /usr/ucb/mail -T, mailnews will try to
compute which messages you deleted out of the mailfile and mark those seen.
Thus, when using /bin/mail, you can mark a message seen with the 'd'
(delete) command. You can reverse this logic by invoking mailnews with the
-d option, so that all messages you do \fBnot\fR delete will be marked seen.
If you prefer -d as a default, just put
.PP
.nf
options mailnews -d
.fi
.PP
in your .newsrc.
.PP
No matter what mailer you are using, if you exit with a command that would
normally leave your mailbox unchanged (such as the /bin/mail 'x' command),
your .newsrc will be left unmodified.
.SH NOTE
For the delete-command interpretation feature to work
your execution path must get you standard UNIX sed(1), sort(1) and comm(1)
utilities; if they aren't found or have properties incompatible with their
Version 7 versions, unpredictable things will happen (most likely no
messages will be marked seen).
.SH BUGS
The -r option and the subject-thread following feature don't like each other.
.SH SEE ALSO
readnews(1),
vnews(1),
rn(1)
