.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH READNEWS 1 "Mar 17, 1989"
.ds ]W News 3.0 (beta level 7)
.SH NAME
readnews \- read news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR readnews " ["
.BI \-a " date"
] [
.BI \-n " newsgroups"
] [
.BI \-t " titles"
] [
.BR \-leprxhfuSL
] [
.BI \-F "[ " includemark " ]"
] [
.BI \-q "[ " titles " ]"
] [
.BR \-D " [ "
.IR level " ] "
]
.PP
.B "readnews \-s"
.PP
.B "readnews \-K"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Readnews
without argument prints unread articles.
There are several interfaces available other than the default:
.TP 10
Flag
Interface
.TP 10
.B \-L
Show the group index page on entry to every newsgroup.
.TP 10
.B \-S
Follow discussion threads when moving to next message. With this option on
you see followups to a message immediately after the message, regardless of
where they actually live.
.TP 10
.B \-F
Sets the include mark used to set off included article text in a reply or
followup. The default is "> ".
.TP 10
.B \-p
All selected articles are sent to the standard output.  No questions asked.
.TP 10
.B \-l
Only the titles output.  The
.I .newsrc
file will not be updated.
.TP 10
.B \-e
Like
.B \-l
but also updates the
.I .newsrc
file.
.LP
The
.B \-r
flag causes the articles to be printed in reverse order.  The
.B \-f
flag prevents any followup articles from being printed.  The
.B \-h
flag causes articles to be printed in a less verbose format,
and is intended for terminals running at 300 baud.
The
.B \-u
flag causes the
.I .newsrc
file to be updated every 5 minutes,
in case of an unreliable system.
(Note that if the
.I .newsrc
file is updated,
the
.B x
command will not restore it to its original contents.)
.PP
The following flags determine the selection of articles.
.TP 10
.BI "\-n " newsgroups
Select all articles that belong to
.I newsgroups.
.TP 10
.BI "\-t " titles
Select all articles whose titles contain one of the strings specified by
.IR titles \&.
.TP 10
.BI "\-a " "\fR[\fP date \fR]\fP"
Select all articles that were posted past the given
.I date
(in
.IR getdate (3)
format).
.TP 10
.B \-x
Ignore
.I .newsrc
file.  That is, select articles that have already been read as well as new ones.
.PP
.I Readnews
maintains a
.I .newsrc
file in the user's home directory that specifies all news articles
already read.  It is updated at the end of each reading session in
which the
.BR \-x " or " \-l
options weren't specified.
If the environment variable
.B NEWSRC
is present, it should be the relative path
name of a file to be used in place of
.IR .newsrc \&.
Note that .newsrc files in non-default locations won't be seen by the expire
utility, so if you do this expire will (in effect) assume that you've seen
every article. This could be a problem if a group you want to read is
volatile (see the
.IR .newsrc (5)
man page for details).
.PP
If the user wishes, command option lines may be placed in the
.I .newsrc
file.
This line starts with the word
.B options
(left justified), optionally followed by the name of a news reader,
followed by the list of standard options just as
they would be typed on the command line.  Such a list may include:
the
.B \-n
flag along with a newsgroup list; a favorite interface; and/or
the
.B \-r
or
.B \-t
flag.  Continuation lines are specified by following lines
beginning with a space or tab character. If a reader name is present,
those options are only passed to that reader; thus
.PP
.nf
options -n all,control,junk
options readnews -h
.fi
.PP
would set your subscription on all readers but set the -h option on readnews
only.
Similarly, options can be specified in the
.B NEWSOPTS
environment parameter.  Where conflicts exist, option on the command
line take precedence, followed by the
.I .newsrc
.B options
line, and lastly the
.B NEWSOPTS
parameter.
.PP
You can use the
.B \-s
flag to print the newsgroup subscription list.
.PP
If you haven't read news in a while (or if you have never read news!)
you can do
.I "readnews \-K"
to Kill (mark as read) all of the articles in the groups to which
you are subscribed.
.PP
The
.B \-q
flag is a privacy-protection switch which is only meaningful and accepted if
your system administrator has enabled the netnews feedback feature. Without an
argument it disables feedback entirely. With an argument, it overrides the
system default feedback subscription that determines which groups feedback is
kept for.
.PP
The
.B \-D
flags sets a debug level. This option is intended for news maintainers
only and is disabled unless TDEBUG was defined during news configuration.
.PP
When the user uses the reply command interfaces, the environment parameter
.B MAILER
will be used to determine
which mailer to use.  The default is
.IR mail (1).
.PP
The user may specify a particular paging progam
for articles.  The environment parameter
.B PAGER
should be set to
the paging program.  The name of the article is referenced with
a
.Ch % .
If no
.Ch %
is present, the article will be piped to the program.
Paging may be disabled by setting
.B PAGER
to a null value.  By default, the pager is
.IR cat (1).
See
.IR newsreaders (5)
for detailed information on environment variables common to all readers.
.SH "COMMANDS"
This section lists the commands you can type to the default and
.I binmail
interface prompts.
The default interface will suggest some common commands in brackets.
Just hitting return is the same as typing the first command.
For example, \*(Lq[ynq]\*(Rq means that the commands
.Ch y
(yes),
.Ch n
(no),
and
.Ch q
(quit) are common responses, and that
.Ch y
is the default.
.sp
.ta 2.5i
Command		Meaning
.IP \fB\-\fP
Backtrack in the articles you've read this session. Each successive - will
backtrack one level further.
.IP \fB#\fP
Report the name and size of the newsgroup.
.IP \fB!\fP
Shell escape.
.IP "\fB<\fP\fImessage ID\fP\fB>\fP"
Look for a particular article.
(See
.I
Standard for Interchange of Usenet Messages
for a description of message ID's).
.IP \fBb\fP
Back.  Back up one article.
.IP \fBc\fP
Cancel the article.  Only the author or the super user can do this.
.IP \fBd\fP
Read a digest.  Breaks up a digest into separate articles
and permits you to read and reply to each piece.
.IP \fBD\fP [\fInumber\fP]
Decrypt.  Invokes a Caesar decoding program on the body of the message.
This is used to decrypt rotated jokes posted to
.BR net.jokes .
Such jokes are usually obscene or otherwise offensive to some
groups of people, and so are rotated to avoid accidental
decryption by people who would be offended.
The title of the joke should indicate the nature of the problem,
enabling people to decide whether to decrypt it or not.
.IP
An explicit
.I number
rotation (usually 13) may be given to force a particular shift.
.IP \fBe\fP
Erase.  Forget that this article was read.
.IP "\fBf\fP [\fItitle\fP]"
Submit a follow up article.
Normally you should leave off the title, since the system will generate
one for you.
You will be placed in your
.B EDITOR
to compose the text of the followup.
.IP \fBF\fP
Like \fBf\fP, but includes the text of the current article.
.IP "\fBfd\fP"
Followup directly, without edited headers.  This is like
.BR f ,
but the headers of the article are not included in the editor buffer.
.IP \fBG\fP
Subscribe (or re-subscribe) to a given group.
.IP \fBh\fP
Header.  Print a more verbose header.
.IP \fBH\fP
Print a very verbose header, containing all known information
about the article.
.IP \fBJ\fP
Global kill.  Mark all remaining articles in this newsgroup (and crossposts
of the same articles in other groups) as read and skip to the next newsgroup.
.IP \fBK\fP
Local kill.  Mark all remaining articles in this newsgroup (but not crossposts
of the same articles in other groups) as read and skip to the next newsgroup.
.IP \f^K\fR
Prompts for a kill command, which it passes down to your news filter process
(if any). See your newsfilter documentation for details on how to use this.
.IP \fBn\fP
No.  Goes on to the next article without printing current one.
In the
.I binmail
interface, this means \*(Lqgo on to the next article\*(Rq,
which will have the same effect as
.B y
or just hitting return.
.IP "\fBN\fP [\fInewsgroup\fP]"
Next Newsgroup.
Go to the next newsgroup or named newsgroup.
.IP \fBp\fP
Print the parent article of this article if it is a followup. This doesn't
work if the current article was posted by A-news or notesfiles.
.IP ^
If the current article is a followup, backtrack to or fetch the top node
of the discussion that it is part of. This doesn't work if the current
article was posted by A-news or notesfiles.
.IP \fBP\fP
Previous Newsgroup.  Go back to previous newsgroup.
.IP \fBq\fP
Quit.  The
.I .newsrc
file will be updated if
.B \-l
or
.B \-x
were not on the command line.
.IP r
Reply.  Reply to article's author via
.IR mail \&.
You are placed in your
.B EDITOR
(by default
.IR vi (1))
with a header specifying
\&\*(LqTo\*(Rq, \*(LqSubject\*(Rq, and \*(LqReferences\*(Rq
lines taken from the message.
You may change or add headers, as appropriate.
You add the text of the reply after the blank line, and then exit
the editor.  The resulting message is mailed to the author of the article.
.IP \fBrd\fP
Reply directly.
You are placed in 
.B MAILER
.RI ( mail
by default) in reply to the author.
Type the text of the reply and then control-D.
.IP "\fBs\fP [\fIfile\fP]"
Save.  The article is appended to the named file. If the filename you give
is not a full pathname, readnews will use it and the environment variables
NEWSBOX and NEWSDIR to give a destination according to the rules given in
.IR newsreaders (5).
If the first character of the file name is
.Ch | ,
the rest of the file name is taken as the name of a program,
which is executed with the text of the article as standard input.
The behavior of this command may be modified by the NEWSCMD enironment
variable; see
.IR newsreaders (5).
.IP \fBug\fP
Unsubscribe from this newsgroup. Also goes on to the next newsgroup.
The command ``U'' will have the same effect.
.IP ud
Unsubscribe from this discussion. All messages that are identifiably followups
to the current message will be ignored from now on.
.IP \fBv\fP
Print the current version of the news software.
.IP \fBw\fP
Same as
.BR s ,
except that the header of the article is skipped.
.IP \fBx\fP
Exit.  Like quit except that
.I .newsrc
is not updated.
.IP \fBy\fP
Yes.  Prints current article and goes on to next. If the current article
has followups, you will see them before the next article in sequence.
.IP \fInumber\fP
Go to \fInumber\fP.
.IP \fB+\fP[\fIn\fP]
Skip
.I n
articles.
The articles skipped are recorded as ``unread'' and will be
offered to you again the next time you read news.
.IP a
Show the index page for this group. Messages not yet seen are marked with an
asterisk.
.IP &
Permits you to enter option switches as you would on the command line. A
switch may be turned off by preceding the key letter with + rather than -.
.IP %
Permits you to define new command macros (see
.IR newsreaders (5)
for details on this feature). Enter the key and trigger, separated by
whitespace.
.IP W
Write your .newsrc file to disk. This is really intended only for debugging
use; you should never need to use it unless you have some reason to believe the
reader is going to flake out and you want to checkpoint things.
.IP /pattern 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
in the subject.
See the section on Regular Expssions in
.IR newsreaders (5).
If
.I pattern
is omitted, the previous pattern is assumed.
.IP /pattern/h 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
in the header.
.IP /pattern/a 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
anywhere in article.
.IP /pattern/r 8
Scan read articles also.
.IP /pattern/c 8
Make search case sensitive.
.IP "/pattern/modifiers:command{:command}" 8
Apply the commands listed to articles matching the search command (possibly
with h, a, or r modifiers).
Applicable commands include \*(Lae\*(Ra (mark as unread), \*(Laj\*(Ra (mark
as read), \*(Lqs dest\*(Rq (save to a destination), \*(Lq!command\*(Rq (shell 
escape) and \*(LqC\*(Rq (cancel).
If the first command is \*(Lae\*(Ra, modifier r is assumed.
For example, to save all articles in a given newsgroup to the line printer
and mark them read, use \*(Lq/^/\||\|lpr:j\*(Rq.
.IP \epattern 8
Scan backward for article containing
.I pattern
in the subject.
May be modified as the forward search is: \epattern\emodifiers[:commands].
It is likely that you will want an r modifier when scanning backward.
.IP t 8
Mark as read all articles with the same subject as the current article.
.IP T 8
Do the same as the t command, but also pass /<subject>/t to your news
filter process (if any).
.PP
The commands
.BR c ,
.BR f ,
.BR fd ,
.BR r ,
.BR rd ,
.BR e ,
.BR h ,
.BR H ,
and
.B s
can be followed by
.BR \- 's
to refer to the previous article.
Thus, when replying to an article using the default interface,
you should normally type
.B r\-
(or
.BR re- )
since by the time you enter
a command, you are being offered the next article.
.PP
On entry to a group, readnews will try and execute whatever command is
present in your .newsrc's commands field (if there is one).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 10
.B readnews
Read all unread articles using the default interface.  The
.I .newsrc
file is updated at the end of the session.
.TP 10
.B "readnews \-p \-n all \-a last thursday"
Print every unread article since last Thursday.  The
.I .newsrc
file is
updated at the end of the session.
.TP 10
.B "readnews \-K"
Discard all unread news.
This is useful after returning from a long trip.
.SH BUGS
.IR readnews
will only accept one command from the initial-commands field of the .newsrc
file, and odd things may happen if that command demands any input.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/readnews.help
Help file for readnews interface
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
binmail(1),
checknews(1),
inews(8),
mail(1),
mailx(1),
news(5),
newsrc(5)
postnews(1),
vnews(1),
getdate(3),
news(5),
newsrc(5),
expire(8),
recnews(8),
sendnews(8),
uurec(8)
.br
.I
How to Read the Network News
by Mark Horton.
.br
.I
Standard for Interchange of Usenet Messages
by Mark Horton.
.SH NOTE
There have been significant changes to readnews for TMN-Netnews.
Most users will probably want to use the new -S option.
The old "-c mailer" and -M options have been replaced by
.IB mailnews (1) .
The "options [reader] ..." feature of .newsrc files is new.
A number of commands have been upgraded to act like their vnews equivalents.
These include -, p, w, ug and ! (which now recognizes the & and | final chars
and sets the $A environment variable). The F, G, ^, & and ud commands
are new. The semantics of s and w have changed slightly, becoming more
rn-like. To get the old behavior, set NEWSDIR="." in your environment
.SH AUTHORS
TMNN version by Eric S. Raymond, based on earlier code by Matt
Glickman, Mark Horton, Stephen Daniel, Tom Truscott and Rick Adams.
