.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH VNEWS 1 "Mar 17, 1989"
.ds ]W News 3.0 (beta level 7)
.SH NAME
vnews \- read news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR vnews " [ " \-a
.IR date " ] [ "
.B \-n
.IR newsgroups " ] [ "
.B \-t
.IR titles " ] [ "
.BR \-hrxupfvwS " ] [ "
.BI \-F "[ " includemark " ] [ "
.BR \-D " [ " level " ]"
.BR \-T " ttyname"
.BR \-q "[ " loudgroups " ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vnews 
is a program for reading USENET news. It is based
on
.IR readnews (1)
but has a CRT oriented interface.
The list of available commands is quite
similar, although since
.I vnews
is a \*(Lqvisual\*(Rq
interface, most
.I vnews
commands do not have to be terminated
by a newline.
.LP
.I Vnews
uses all but two lines of the screen to display
the current article.
Normally the two status lines are the last and second-to-last on the screen
(the description that follows will assume this) but vnews can be compiled
to make them the last and first lines on the screen (this makes for
smoother-looking screen I/O on terminals that don't support scrolling
regions).
.LP
The next-to-last line is the secondary prompt line,
and is used to input string arguments to commands.  The last line
contains several fields.  The first field is the prompt
field. If
.I vnews
is at the end of an article, the prompt is
\&\*(Lqnext?\*(Rq; otherwise the prompt is \*(Lqmore?\*(Rq. The second field
is the newsgroup field, which displays the current newsgroup,
the number of the current article, the number of
the last article in the newsgroup and the number of messages in
the newsgroup that are still unseen. The third field contains
the current time, and the last field contains the word
\&\*(Lqmail\*(Rq if you have mail. When you receive new mail, the bell
on the terminal is rung and the word \*(LqMAIL\*(Rq appears in capital
letters for 30 seconds. Note that these last two fields may be
disabled by your system USENET administrator for economy, especially
if you're on a workstation-type windowed display like a Sun or AT&T 7300.
.PP
.I Vnews 
without any arguments prints unread articles.
.PP
The following flags control the presentation of articles.
.TP 10
.B \-S
Follow discussion threads when moving to next message. With this option on
you see followups to a message immediately after the message, regardless of
where they actually live.
.TP 10
.BI "\-a " "\fR[\fP date \fR]\fP"
Select articles posted after the given
.I date
(in
.IR getdate (3)
format).
.TP 10
.BI "\-n " newsgroups
Select articles belonging to
.I newsgroups.
.TP 10
.BI "\-t " titles
Select articles whose titles contain one of the strings specified by
.I titles.
.TP 10
.B \-r
Print the articles in reverse order.
.TP 10
.B \-x
Ignore
.I .newsrc
file. That is, select articles that have already been read as well as new ones.
.TP 10
.B \-u
Update the 
.I .newsrc
file every 5 minutes, as in the case of an unreliable system.
(Note that if the
.I .newsrc
file is updated, the
.B x
command will not restore it to its original contents.)
.TP 10
.B \-p
Controls verbosity of article header printing. The default is -p1, which
displays selected headers.
The -p0 option is for use on slow ttys -- it disables highlighting and pares
down the size of the default header.
Selecting -p2 causes vnews to display more of the RFC-822 article headers by
default (You can see all of them with the H command).
Suffixing the verbosity level with `h' causes a pause and wait for confirmation
after each header is printed. Thus -p0h is appropriate for slow hardcopy ttys.
.TP 10
.B \-F
Sets the include mark used to set off included article text in a reply or
followup. The default is "> ".
.PP
If you haven't read news in a while (or if you have never read news!)
you can do
.I "readnews \-K"
to Kill (mark as read) all of the articles in the groups to which
you are subscribed (see \fIreadnews\fR(1)) for details.
.PP
.I Vnews
maintains a
.I .newsrc
file in the your home directory that specifies all news articles
already read.  It is updated at the end of each reading session
unless the
.BR \-x
option was specified.
If the environment variable
.B NEWSRC
is present, it should be the path
name of a file to be used in place of
.IR .newsrc \&.
Note that .newsrc files in non-default locations won't be seen by the expire
utility, so if you do this expire will (in effect) assume that you've seen
every article. This could be a problem if a group you want to read is
volatile (see the
.IR .newsrc (5)
man page for details).
.PP
If you wish, command options lines may be placed in your
.I .newsrc
file.
This line starts with the word
.B options
(left justified), optionally followed by the name of a reader,
followed by a list of standard options just as
they would be typed on the command line.  Such a list may include:
the
.B \-n
flag along with a newsgroup list and/or
the
.B \-r
or
.B \-t
flag.  
Continuation lines begin with a space or tab character.
If a reader name is present, those options are only passed to that reader;
thus
.PP
.nf
options -n all, control, junk
options vnews -pS
.fi
.PP
would set your subscription on all readers but set the -p and -S options on
vnews only.
.PP
The
.B \-q
flag is a privacy-protection switch which is only meaningful and accepted if
your system administrator has enabled the netnews feedback feature. Without an
argument it disables feedback entirely. With an argument, it overrides the
system default feedback subscription that determines which groups feedback is
kept for.
.PP
The
.B \-w
(workstation) flag suppresses time and mail status display (use this if you're
running under something like SunWindows or the 3B1 User Agent that shows these
things on a status bar). Does nothing if CHECKMAIL and SHOWTIME are both off.
.PP
The
.B \-D
flags sets a debug level. This option is intended for news maintainers
only and is disabled unless TDEBUG was defined during news configuration.
Debug messages will appear in the message line, but may flash by quickly.
.PP
The
.B \-T
option may be used to assist debugging under sdb(1) or any similar tool
in a multiple-screen or multi-window configuration. 
It is interpreted as the name of a tty to redirect screen
I/O to/from. If you don't give a full path name it will try to fill in the
missing path by prepending "/dev/" and, further, "tty" if the argument starts
with a digit. This option is intended for news maintainers
only and is disabled unless TDEBUG was defined during news configuration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Options can be specified in the
.B NEWSOPTS
environment parameter.  Where conflicts exist, options on the command
line take precedence, followed by the
.I .newsrc
.B options
line, and lastly the
.B NEWSOPTS
parameter. See
.IR newsreaders (5)
for detailed information on other environment variables common to all readers.
.SH "COMMANDS"
.PP
It is useful to know that there are actually three viewing modes in vnews.
These are: article mode (for reading text), subject-index mode (useful for
going through lots of articles by sender and subject) and group-list mode.
.PP
Vnews starts you in group-list mode. You will see a list of the groups you are
currently subscribed groups. Visited groups will be marked with an underscore
in the second column. The current group will be pointed at with a '>'. Groups
marked with a `*' are new ones created since since the end of your last reader
session. All normal movement and marking commands work as usual, but a space or
newline takes you to subject-index mode to view the current group.
As you exit each group, you'll return to group list mode.
.PP
Subject-index mode helps you to browse through lots of news,
looking only at messages with interesting titles and/or senders.
In subject-index mode, instead of seeing the articles themselves, you see a
list of articles, senders and subjects for the current group in a format
much like a mailer message list. Messages already seen will be
marked with an underscore in the second column. The current message will be
pointed at with a '>'. Articles marked with a `*' are new ones that came in
since the start of your session; you'll see these after the next time that
vnews updates its tables.
.PP
All normal movement and marking commands work as usual in subject-index mode,
but a space or newline takes you back to article mode to view the current
article, after which you return to subject list mode. Thus, once you're in it,
you can just hit the spacebar repeatedly to see articles and then pop out to
the index again.
.PP
Article mode is what you read article text in; it presents you with article
headers (and, unless -h is on, first pages) of messages to be accepted
or rejected. In this mode, a space or newline brings up the next page of the
article; if you're at the last page, it pops you back to subject-index mode
pointing at the next article.
.PP
Each
.I vnews
command may be preceded by a count.  Some
commands use the count; others ignore it. If count is omitted,
it defaults to one. Some commands prompt for an argument
on the second line from the bottom of the screen.  Standard UNIX erase
and kill processing is done on this argument.  The argument is
terminated by a return. An interrupt
(\s-2DEL\s0 or \s-2BREAK\s0) gets you out of any partially entered command. 
.sp
In the following table, ^B is used as a shorthand for Control-B.
.sp
.ta 2.5i
Command		Meaning
.IP \fB\s-2CR\s0\fP
A carriage return, space or `y' prints more of the current article,
or goes on to the next article if you are at the end of
the current article. A \fB\s-2SPACE\s0\fP is equivalent to \fB\s-2CR\s0\fP.
If the -S option is on the current article has followups, you will see them
before you see the article that would otherwise be next in sequence.
.IP \fB^B\fP
Go backwards
.I count
pages.
.IP \fB^F\fP
Go forward
.I count
pages.
.IP \fB^D\fP
Go forwards half a page.
.IP \fB^U\fP
Go backwards half a page.
.IP \fB^Z\fP
Go forwards
.I count
lines.
.IP \fB^E\fP
Go backwards
.I count
lines.
.IP \fB^L\fP
Redraw the screen. \fB^L\fP may be typed at any time.
.IP \fBb\fP
Back up one article in the current group.
.IP \fBl\fP
Go to subject-list mode. This toggles; if you type it in subject mode, you'll
go back to article mode.
.IP \fBg\fP
Go to group-list mode. This command is a toggle; if
you type it in group mode, you'll go back to article mode.
.IP \fBc\fP
Cancel the article.  Only the author of the article or the super user
can do this.
.IP \fBe\fP
Erase.  Forget that this article was read.
.IP \fBf\fP
Submit a follow-up article. You will be placed in your
.B EDITOR
to compose the text of the follow-up.
.IP \fBF\fP
Like \fBf\fP, but includes the text of the current article.
.IP \fBG\fP
Subscribe (or re-subscribe) to a given group.
.IP \fBh\fP
Go back to the top of the article and display only the
header.
.IP \fBn\fP
No.  Go on to the next article without printing current one. 
.B \&.
is equivalent to
.BR n .
This is convenient if your terminal
has a keypad.
.IP \fBp\fP
Show the parent article (the article that the
current article is a follow-up to). This doesn't work
if the current article was posted by A-news or notesfiles.
.IP \fB^\fP
If the current article is a followup, backtrack to or fetch the top node
of the discussion that it is part of. This doesn't work if the current
article was posted by A-news or notesfiles.
.IP \fBq\fP
Quit.  The
.I .newsrc
file will be updated unless
.B \-x
was on the command line.
.IP \fBr\fP
Reply.  Reply to article's author via mail.
You are placed in your
.B EDITOR
with a header specifying
\&\*(LqTo\*(Rq, \*(LqSubject\*(Rq, and \*(LqReferences\*(Rq
lines taken from the message.
You may change or add headers, as appropriate.
Add the text of the reply after the blank line, and then exit
the editor.  The resulting message is mailed to the author of the article.
.IP \fBR\fP
This is the same as \fBr\fP except the body of the article is included
in your mail message for you.
.IP \fBESC-r\fP
Reply directly.  You are placed in your
.B MAILER
as if you had run it specifying
the author of the article as the recipient of a letter.
.IP "\fBs\fP [\fIfile\fP]"
Save.  The article is appended to the named file. If the filename you give
is not a full pathname, readnews will use it and the environment variables
NEWSBOX and NEWSDIR to give a destination according to the rules given in
.IR newsreaders (5).
If the first character of the file name is
.Ch | ,
the rest of the file name is taken as the name of a program,
which is executed with the text of the article as standard input.
The behavior of this command may be modified by the NEWSCMD enironment
variable; see
.IR newsreaders (5).
.IP \fBug\fP
Unsubscribe to the current group. This is a two character
command to ensure that it is not typed accidentally
and to leave room for other types of unsubscribes (e.g. 
unsubscribe to discussion).
.IP \fBud\fP
Unsubscribe from this discussion. All messages that are identifiably followups
to the current message will be ignored from now on.
.IP \fBv\fP
Print the current version of the news software.
.IP \fBw\fP
Write. Like save
.BR s ,
except that the headers are not written out.
.IP \fBx\fP
Exit.  Like quit except that
.I .newsrc
is not updated.
.IP [\fIn\fP]\fBA\fP
Go to article number \fIn\fP in the current newsgroup.
.IP \fBD\fP
Decrypts a joke. It only handles rot 13 jokes.   The
.B D
command is a toggle; typing another
.B D
re-encrypts the
joke.
.IP \fBH\fP
Print a very verbose header, containing all known information
about the article.
.IP \fBJ\fP
Kill (mark as read) the rest of the articles in the current group. Cross-posts
of these articles in other groups are also marked read.
This is useful if you can't keep up with the volume in the newsgroup,
but don't want to unsubscribe.
.IP \fBK\fP
Like \fBJ\fP, but only kills locally (i.e. doesn't mark cross-postings in
other groups read). It's faster.
.IP \f^K\fR
Prompts for a kill command, which it passes down to your news filter process
(if any). See your newsfilter documentation for details on how to use this.
.IP "\fBN\fP [\fInewsgroup\fP]"
Go to the next newsgroup or named newsgroup.
.IP [\fIn\fP]\fB+\fP
Skip
.I n
articles.
The articles skipped are recorded as ``unread'' and will be
offered to you again the next time you read news.
.IP \fB\-\fP
Go back to last article. Successive - commands will backtrack through
previously-read articles.
.IP \fB<\fP
Prompt for an article ID or the rest of a message ID.
It will display the article if it exists.
.IP \fB#\fP
Report the name and size of the newsgroup.
.IP \fB?\fP
Print a short help message.
.IP \fB!\fP
Passes the rest of the command line to the shell.  The
environment variable
.B A
is set to the name of the file
containing the current article.  If the last character
of the command is a
.BR & ,
then the
.B &
is deleted and
the command is run in the background with stdin, stdout
and stderr redirected to
.IR /dev/null .
If the command is
missing, the shell is invoked. Use the
.B d
command (or
essentially any other command) to turn on the display
after the program terminates.
.IP &
Permits you to enter option switches as you would on the command line. A
switch may be turned off by preceding the key letter with + rather than -.
.IP %
Permits you to define new command macros (see
.IR newsreaders (5)
for details on this feature). Enter the key and trigger, separated by
whitespace.
.IP W
Write your .newsrc file to disk. This is really intended only for debugging
use; you should never need to use it unless you have some reason to believe the
reader is going to flake out and you want to checkpoint things.
.IP /pattern 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
in the subject.
See the section on Regular Expressions.
If
.I pattern
is omitted, the previous pattern is assumed.
.IP /pattern/h 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
in the header.
.IP /pattern/a 8
Scan forward for article containing
.I pattern
anywhere in article.
.IP /pattern/r 8
Scan already-read articles also.
.IP /pattern/c 8
Make search case sensitive.
.IP "/pattern/modifiers:command{:command}" 8
Apply the commands listed to articles matching the search command (possibly
with h, a, or r modifiers).
Applicable commands include \*(Lae\*(Ra (mark as unread), \*(Laj\*(Ra (mark
as read), \*(Lqs dest\*(Rq (save to a destination), \*(Lq!command\*(Rq (shell 
escape) and \*(LqC\*(Rq (cancel). If the first command is \*(Lae\*(Ra, modifier
r is assumed.
For example, to save all articles in a given newsgroup to the line printer
and mark them read, use \*(Lq/^/\||\|lpr:j\*(Rq.
.IP \epattern 8
Scan backward for article containing
.I pattern
in the subject.
May be modified as the forward search is: \epattern\emodifiers[:commands].
It is likely that you will want an r modifier when scanning backward.
.IP t 8
Mark as read all articles with the same subject as the current article.
.IP T 8
Do the same as the t command, but also pass /<subject>/t to your news
filter process (if any).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 10
.B vnews
Read all unread articles using the
.IR visual
interface.  The
.I .newsrc
file is updated at the end of the session.
.TP 10
.B vnews \-n all !mod \-r
Read all unread articles except articles whose newsgroups begin with
.B mod.
in reverse order.  The
.I .newsrc
file is updated at the end of the session.
.TP 10
.B "vnews \-n all \-a last thursday"
Print every unread article since last Thursday.  The
.I .newsrc
file is
updated at the end of the session.
.TP 10
.B "vnews \-K"
Discard all unread news.
This is useful after returning from a long trip.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/vnews.help
Help file for
.IR visual
interface
.PD
.SH "ESCAPE HANDLING"
Commands that take more than one character of input (s, w, P, N, etc) accept
the full set of rn-like %-escapes documented in
.IR newsreaders (5).
Typing %% while answering a query from one of these commands will force
escape expansion of the text in the buffer so far.
.PP
The %m (mode, see newsreaders(5) for details) escape has the following values:
.PD 0
.TP 10
"A"
when the reader is displaying an article
.TP 10
"S"
when the reader is displaying a subject list
.TP 10
"G"
when the reader is displaying a group list
.TP 10
"H"
when the reader is displaying a help filw
.TP 10
"I"
during initialization, before an article has been seen.
.PP
The %V escape has the value "vnews".
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
checknews(1),
inews(8),
postnews(1),
readnews(1),
vnews(1),
getdate(3),
news(5),
newsrc(5),
expire(8),
recnews(8),
sendnews(8),
uurec(8)
.SH NOTE
There have been significant changes to vnews for TMN-netnews.
Most readers will probably want to use the new -S option.
The "options [reader] ..." feature of .newsrc files is new.
The behavior of the - command is very different.
The ! command now recognizes the & and | final chars
and sets the $A environment variable). The F, g, l, ^, & and ud commands
and the group-list and subject-index modes are new.
The semantics of s and w have changed slightly, becoming more rn-like. To get
the old behavior, set NEWSDIR="." in your environment
The -c and -h options have been replaced by -p modes; defaults for -p have
been set to serve today's faster tty devices. 
.SH AUTHORS
TMN-netnews version by Eric S. Raymond, based on earlier code by Matt
Glickman, Mark Horton, Stephen Daniel, Tom Truscott and Rick Adams.
